than still contemned andflattered.
To be worst,
the lowest and mostdejected thing of fortune,
stands still in esperance,lives not in fear.
The lamentable change isfrom the best.
The worst returns tolaughter.
Welcome, then,
thou unsubstantial airthat I embrace.
The wretch that thou hastblown unto the worst
owes nothing to thyblasts.
But who comes here?
My father, poorly led?
World, world, O world.
But that thy strangemutations make us hate thee,
life would not yield toage.
O, my good lord, I havebeen your tenant
and your father's tenantthese fourscore years.
Away, get thee away.
Good friend, be gone.
Thy comforts can do me nogood at all.
Thee, they may hurt.
But you cannot see yourway.
I have no way andtherefore want no eyes.
I stumbled when I saw.
Full oft 'tis seen, ourmeans secure us,
and our mere defects proveour commodities.
O dear son Edgar,
the food of thy abusedfather's wrath.
Might I but live to seethee in my touch,
I'd say I had eyes again.
How now?
Who's there?
O gods!
Who is't can say "I am atthe worst"?
I am worse than e'er Iwas.
'Tis poor mad Tom.
And worse I may be yet.
The worst is not
so long as we can say,"This is the worst."
Fellow, where goest?
Is it a beggar man?
Madman and beggar too.
He has some reason, elsehe could not beg.
In the last night's storm,I such a fellow saw
that made me think a man aworm.
My son came then into mymind,
and yet my mind was thenscarce friends with him.
I have heard more since.
As flies to wanton boysare we to the gods!
They kill us for theirsport.
How should this be?
Bad is the trade that mustplay fool to sorrow,
angering itself andothers.
Bless thee, master!
Is it the naked fellow?
Aye, my lord.
Then, prithee, get theegone.
If, for my sake, thou wilto'ertake us,
hence a mile or twain, i'the way toward Dover,
do it for ancient love,
and bring some coveringfor this naked soul,
which I'll entreat to leadme.
Alack, sir, he is mad.
'Tis the times' plague whenmadmen lead the blind.
Do as I bid thee, orrather do thy pleasure.
Above the rest, be gone.
I'll get him the bestapparel that I have,
come on't what will.
Sirrah, naked fellow.
Poor Tom's a-cold.
I cannot daub it further.
Come hither, fellow.
And yet I must.
Bless thy sweet eyes, theybleed.
Dost thou know the way toDover?
Both stile and gate,horseway and footpath.
Poor Tom hath been scaredout of his good wits.
Bless thee, good man'sson, from the foul fiend!
Five fiends have been inpoor Tom at once:
of lust, as Obidicut;
Hobbididence, prince ofdumbness;
Mahu, of murder; Modo, ofstealing;
Flibbertigibbet, ofmopping and mowing,
who since possesseschambermaids and waitingwomen.
So bless thee, master.
Here, take this purse,
thou whom the heavens'plagues have humbled toall strokes.
That I am wretched makesthee the happier.
Heavens, deal so still.
Let the superfluous andlust-dieted man
that slaves yourordinance,
that will not see becausehe doth not feel,
feel your power quickly.
So distribution shouldundo excess
and each man have enough.
Dost thou know Dover?
Aye, master.
There is a cliff, whosehigh and bending head
looks fearfully in theconfined deep.
Bring me but to the verybrim of it,
and I'll repair the miserythou dost bear
with something rich aboutme.
From that place, I shallno leading need.
Give me thy hand.
Poor Tom shall lead thee.
Welcome, my lord.
I marvel our mild husbandnot met us on the way.
Now, where's your master?
Madam, within, but neverman so changed.
I told him of the armythat was landed;
he smiled at it.
I told him you werecoming; his answer was,"The worse."
Of Gloucester's treachery
and of the loyal serviceof his son,
when I informed him, thenhe called me sot
and told me I had turnedthe wrong side out.
What most he shoulddislike seems pleasant tohim;
what like, offensive.
Then shall you go nofurther.
It is the cowish terror ofhis spirit
that dares not undertake.
He'll not feel wrongswhich tie him to ananswer.
Our wishes on the way mayprove effects.
Back, Edmund, to mybrother.
Hasten his musters, andconduct his powers.
I must change arms at home
and give the distaff intomy husband's hands.
This trusty servant shallpass between us.
Ere long you are like tohear,
if you dare venture inyour own behalf,
a mistress's command.
Wear this.
No, spare speech.
Decline your head.
This kiss, if it durstspeak,
would stretch thy spiritsup into the air.
Conceive, and fare theewell.
Yours in the ranks ofdeath.
My most dear Gloucester.
O, the difference of manand man.
To thee, a woman'sservices are due.
My fool usurps my body.
Madam, here comes my lord.
I have been worth thewhistle.
O Goneril.
You are not worth the dust
which the rude wind blowsin your face.
I fear your disposition.
That nature, whichcontemns its origin,
cannot be bordered certainin itself.
She that herself willsliver and disbranch
from her material sap
perforce must wither andcome to deadly use.
No more; the text isfoolish.
Wisdom and goodness to thevile seem vile.
Filths savor butthemselves.
What have you done?
Tigers, not daughters,what have you performed?
A father and a graciousaged man
whose reverence even thehead-lugged bear would lick
most barbarous, mostdegenerate,
have you madded.
Could my good brothersuffer you to do it?
A man, a prince, by him sobenefited?
If that the heavens do nottheir visible spirits
send quickly down to tamethese vile offenses,
it will come.
Humanity must perforceprey on itself
like monsters of the deep.
Milk-livered man
that bear'st a cheek forblows, a head for wrongs,
who hast not in thy brows
an eye discerning thinehonor from thy suffering,
that not know'st fools dothose villains pity
who are punished ere theyhave done their mischief.
Where's thy drum?
France spreads his bannersin our noiseless land.
With plumed helm, thystate begins to threat
whilst thou, a moral fool,
sit'st still and criest,"Alack, why does he so?"
See thyself, devil.
Proper deformity shows notin the fiend
so horrid as in woman.
O, vain fool!
Thou changed and self-coveredthing, for shame.
Be-monster not thyfeature.
Were it my fitness to letthese hands obey my blood,
they are apt enough todislocate and tear thyflesh and bones.
Howe'er thou art a fiend,
a woman's shape dothshield thee.
Marry, your manhood.
What news?
O, my good lord, the Dukeof Cornwall's dead,
slain by his servant,
going to put out the othereye of Gloucester.
Gloucester's eye?
A servant that he bred,thrilled with remorse,
opposed against the act,
bending his sword to hisgreat master,
who, thereat enraged, flewon him
and amongst them felledhim dead
but not without thatharmful stroke
which since hath pluckedhim after.
This shows you are above,you justicers,
that these, our nethercrimes, so speedily canvenge.
O poor Gloucester, lost hehis other eye?
Both, both, my lord.
This letter, madam, cravesa speedy answer.
'Tis from your sister.
One way I like this well.
But being widow and myGloucester with her,
may all the building of myfancy pluck
upon my hateful life.
Another way, the news isnot so tart.
I'll read and answer.
Where was his son whenthey did take his eyes?
Come with my lady hither.
He is not here.
No, my good lord; I methim back again.
Knows he the wickedness?
Aye, my good lord; 'twashe informed against him
and quit the house onpurpose
that their punishmentmight have the freercourse.
Gloucester, I live tothank thee
for the love thou show'dstthe king
and to revenge thine eyes.
Come hither, friend. Tellme what more thou know'st.
Alack, 'tis he.
Why, he was met even nowas mad as the vexed sea,
singing aloud,
crowned with rank fumiterand furrow-weeds,
with hardocks, hemlock,nettles, cuckoo-flowers,Darnel,
and all the idle weedsthat grow in oursustaining corn.
A century send forth.
Search every acre in thehigh-grown field,
and bring him to our eye.
What can man's wisdom
in the restoring hisbereaved sense?
He that helps him take allmy outward worth.
There is means, madam.
Our foster-nurse of natureis repose,
the which he lacks.
That to provoke in him aremany simples operative
whose power will close theeye of anguish.
All blest secrets,
all you unpublishedvirtues of the Earth,
spring with my tears.
Be aidant and remediate inthe good man's distress.
Seek, seek for him, lesthis ungoverned rage
dissolve the life thatwants the means to lead it.
News, madam.
The British powers aremarching hitherward.
'Tis known before;
our preparation stands inexpectation of them.
O dear father,
it is thy business that Igo about.
Therefore, great France
my mourning and importunetears hath pitied.
No blown ambition doth ourarms incite
but love, dear love, andour aged father's right.
Soon may I hear and seehim.
But are my brother'spowers set forth?
Aye, madam.
Himself in person there?
Madam, with much ado.
Your sister is the bettersoldier.
Lord Edmund spoke not toyour lord at home?
No, madam.
What might import mysister's letter to him?
I know not, lady.
'Faith, he is posted henceon serious matter.
It was great ignorance,Gloucester's eyes being out,
to let him live.
Where he arrives, he movesall hearts against us.
Edmund, I think, is gone,in pity of his misery,
to dispatch his nightedlife
moreover, to descry thestrength o' the enemy.
I must needs after him,madam, with my letter.
Our troops set forthtomorrow.
Stay with us; the ways aredangerous.
I may not, madam.
My lady charged my duty inthis business.
Why should she write toEdmund?
Might not you transporther purposes by word?
Belike, somethings I knownot what.
I'll love thee much; letme unseal the letter.
Madam, I had rather
I know your lady does notlove her husband.
I'm sure of that.
And at her late beinghere, she gave strangeoeillades
and most speaking looks tonoble Edmund.
- I know you are of herbosom. - I?
I speak in understanding.You are; I know it.
Therefore I do advisethee, take this note.
My lord is dead.
Edmund and I have talked.
And more convenient is hefor my hand
than for your lady's.
You may gather more.
If you do find him, prayyou, give him this.
And when your mistresshears thus much from you,I pray,
desire her call her wisdomto her.
And so farewell.
If you do chance to hearof that blind traitor,
preferment falls on himthat cuts him off.
Would I could meet him,madam.
I should show what party Ido follow.
Fare thee well.
When shall I come to thetop of that same hill?
You do climb up it now.
Look how we labor.
Methinks the ground iseven.
Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the sea?
No, truly.
Why, then, your othersenses grow imperfect
by your eyes' anguish.
So may it be, indeed.
Methinks thy voice isaltered and thou speak'st
in better phrase andmatter than thou didst.
You are much deceived.
In nothing am I changedbut in my garments.
Methinks you're betterspoken.
Come on, sir.
Here's the place.
Stand still.
How fearful and dizzy 'tisto cast one's eyes so low.
The crows and choughs thatwing the midway air
show scarce so gross asbeetles.
Halfway down hangs one
that gathers samphire,dreadful trade.
Methinks he seems nobigger than his head.
The fishermen that walkupon the beach
appear like mice
and yond tall anchoring bark,diminished to her cock,
her cock a buoy almost toosmall for sight.
The murmuring surge
that on the unnumberedidle pebbles chafes
cannot be heard so high.
I'll look no more lest mybrain turn
and the deficient sighttopple down headlong.
Set me where you stand.
Give me your hand.
You are now within a footof the extreme verge.
For all beneath the moonwould I not leap upright.
Let go my hand.
Here, friend, 's anotherpurse,
in it a jewel well worth apoor man's taking.
Fairies and gods prosperit with thee.
Go thou further off.
Bid me farewell, and letme hear thee going.
Now fare you well, goodsir!
With all my heart.
Why I do trifle thus withhis despair
is done to cure it.
O you mighty gods.
This world I do renounceand, in your sights,
shake patiently my greataffliction off.
If I could bear it longerand not fall to quarrel
with your great opposelesswills,
my snuff and loathed partof nature
should burn itself out.
If Edgar live, O, blesshim.
Now, fellow, fare theewell.
Gone, sir! Farewell!
And yet I know not howconceit may rob thetreasury of life
when life itself yields tothe theft.
Had he been where hethought, by this, hadthought been past.
Alive or dead?
Ho, you sir.
Friend?
Hear you, sir.
Speak.
Thus might he pass indeed.
Yet he revives.
What are you, sir?
Away, and let me die.
Hadst thou been aught butgossamer, feathers, air,
so many fathoms downprecipitating,
thou'dst shiver'st like anegg.
But thou dost breathe,hast heavy substance,
bleed'st not, speak'st,art sound.
Ten masts at each make notthe altitude
which thou hastperpendicularly fell.
Thy life's a miracle.
Speak yet again.
Have I fallen, or no?
From the dread summit ofthis chalky bourn.
Look up a-height.
The shrill-gorged lark cannotbe seen or heard so far.
Do but look up.
Alack, I have no eyes.
Is wretchedness deprivedthat benefit
to end itself by death?
'Twas yet some comfort,
when misery could beguilethe tyrant's rage
and frustrate his proudwill.
Give me your arm.
Up.
So.
How is 't?
Feel you your legs?
You stand.
Too well, too well.
This is above allstrangeness.
Upon the crown o' thecliff,
what thing was that whichparted from you?
A poor unfortunate beggar.
As I stood here below,
methought his eyes weretwo full moons.
He had a thousand noses,
horns whelked and wavedlike the enridged sea.
It was some fiend.
Therefore, thou happyfather, think that theclearest gods,
who make them honors ofmen's impossibilities,
have preserved thee.
I do remember now.
Henceforth, I'll bearaffliction
till it do cry out itself,"Enough, enough," and die.
That thing you speak of, Itook it for a man.
Often 'twould say, "Thefiend, the fiend."
He led me to that place.
Bear free and patientthoughts.
Huh?
Who comes here?
No, they cannot touch mefor coining;
I am the king himself.
O thou side-piercingsight.
Nature's above art in thatrespect.
There's your press-money.
The fellow handles his bowlike a crow-keeper.
Draw me a clothier's yard!
Look, look, a mouse.
See, see, this piece oftoasted cheese will do it.
There's my gauntlet.
I'll prove it on a giant.
Bring up the brown bills!
O, well flown, bird.
I' the clout, i' theclout, pssshw!
Give the word.
Sweet marjoram.
Pass.
I know that voice.
Ah!
Goneril, with a whitebeard!
They flattered me like adog,
told me I had white hairsin my beard
before the black ones werethere.
To say "aye" and "no" toeverything that I said.
"Aye" and "no" too was nogood divinity.
When the rain came to wetme once
and the wind to make mechatter,
when the thunder would notpeace at my bidding,
there I found 'em.
There I smelt 'em out.
Go to, they're not men o'their words.
They told me I waseverything.
'Tis a lie; I am notague-proof.
The trick of that voice Ido well remember.
Is it not the king?
Aye, every inch a king.
When I do stare, see howthe subject quakes.
I pardon that man's life.
What was thy cause?
Adultery?
Thou shalt not die.
Die for adultery? No.
The wren goes to 't.
The small gilded fly doeslecher in my sight.
Let copulation thrive,
for Gloucester's bastardson was kinder to hisfather
than my daughters got'tween the lawful sheets.
To it, luxury, pell-mell.
For I lack soldiers.
Behold yond simperingdame,
whose face between herforks presages snow,
that minces virtue
and does shake the head tohear of pleasure's name.
The fitchew, nor thesoiled horse,
goes to 't with a moreriotous appetite.
Down from the waist, theyare centaurs,
though women all above.
But to the girdle do thegods inherit;
beneath is all thefiends'.
There's hell, there'sdarkness, there is thesulfurous pit.
Burning, scalding, stench,consumption.
Fie, fie, fie!
Agh!
Give me an ounce of civet,good apothecary,
to sweeten my imagination.
There's money for thee.
O, let me kiss that hand.
Let me wipe it first; itsmells of mortality.
O ruined piece of nature.
This great world shall sowear out to naught.
Dost thou know me?
I remember thine eyes wellenough.
Dost squinny at me?
No, do thy worst, blindCupid;
I'll not love.
Read thou this challenge.
Mark but the penning ofit.
Were all thy letters suns,I could not see one.
I would not take this fromreport.
It is, and my heart breaksat it.
Read!
What, with the case ofeyes?
O, ho, are you there withme?
No eyes in your head norno money in your purse?
Your eyes are in a heavy caseand your purse in a light.
Yet you may see how thisworld goes.
I see it feelingly.
What, art mad?
A man may see how thisworld goes with no eyes.
Look with thine ears.
See how yond justice railson yond simple thief.
Hark, in thine ear.
Change places and,handy-dandy,
which is the justice andwhich the thief?
Hast seen a farmer's dogbark at a beggar?
Aye, sir.
And the creature run fromthe cur?
There thou mightst beholdthe great image ofauthority.
A dog's obeyed in office.
Woof, woof, woof!
Thou rascal beadle, holdthy bloody hand!
Why dost thou lash thatwhore?
Thou hotly lust'st to useher in that kind
for which thou whipp'sther.
The usurer hangs thecozener.
Through tattered clothes,small vices do appear.
Robes and furred gownshide all.
Plate sin with gold,
and the strong lance ofjustice hurtless breaks.
Arm it in rags, a pigmy'sstraw does pierce it.
None does offend, none, Isay, none.
I'll able 'em.
Take this of me, myfriend,
who have the power to sealthe accuser's lips.
Get thee glass eyes and,like a scurvy politician,
seem to see the thingsthou dost not.
Now, now, now, now.
Pull off my boots.
Harder, harder.
So.
O, matter and impertinencymixed.
Reason in madness.
If thou wilt weep myfortune, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough;thy name is Gloucester.
Thou must be patient!
We came crying hither.
Thou know'st, the firsttime that we smell the air,
we wawl and cry.
I will preach to thee.Mark.
Alack, alack the day.
When we are born, we crythat we are come
to this great stage offools.
This a good block.
It were a delicatestratagem
to shoe a troop of horsewith felt.
I'll put it in proof,
and when I've stolen uponthese son-in-laws,
then, kill, kill...
Here he is. Lay a handupon him.
Sir, your most deardaughter
No rescue?
What, a prisoner?
I am even the natural foolof fortune.
Use me well; you shallhave ransom.
Let me have surgeons; I amcut to the brains.
You shall have anything.
No seconds?
All myself?
Why, this would make a mana man of salt,
to use his eyes for gardenwater-pots,
aye, and laying autumn'sdust.
Good sir.
I will die bravely, like asmug bridegroom.
What?
I will be jovial.
Come, come.
I am a king, my masters.
Know you that?
You are a royal one, andwe obey you.
Then there's life in't.
And you shall get it, youshall get it by running!
A sight most pitiful inthe meanest wretch,
past speaking of in aking.
Hail, gentle sir.
Sir, speed you. What'syour will?
Do you know aught, sir, ofa battle toward?
Most sure and vulgar.
Everyone hears that, whichcan distinguish sound.
But, by your favor, hownear's the other army?
Near and on speedy foot.
The main descry stands onthe hourly thought.
I thank you, sir. That'sall.
Though that the queen onspecial cause is here,
her army is moved on.
I thank you, sir.
You ever-gentle gods, takemy breath from me.
Let not my worser spirittempt me again
to die before you please.
Well pray you, father.
Now, good sir, what areyou?
A most poor man, made tameto fortune's blows
who, by the art of knownand feeling sorrows,
am pregnant to good pity.
Give me your arm; I'lllead you to some biding.
Hearty thanks.
The bounty and the benisonof heaven to boot andboot.
A proclaimed prize.
Most happy.
That eyeless head of thine
was first framed flesh toraise my fortunes.
Thou old unhappy traitor,briefly thyself remember.
The sword is out that mustdestroy thee.
O, let thy friendly handput strength enough to't.
Wherefore, bold peasant,
darest thou support apublished traitor?
Hence, lest that theinfection of his fortune take
like hold on thee.
Let go his arm.
Let go, slave, or thoudiest.
Out, dunghill!
Slave, thou hast slain me.
Villain, take my purse.
If ever thou wilt thrive,bury my body.
And take the letters whichthou find'st about me
to Edmund, Earl ofGloucester.
Seek him out upon theEnglish party.
O, untimely death.
Death.
I know thee well: aserviceable villain,
as duteous to the vices ofthy mistress
as badness would desire.
What, is he dead?
Let's see; the letter thathe speaks of
may be my friend.
Leave, gentle wax.
And, manners, blame usnot.
To know our enemies'minds, we'd rip theirhearts.
Their papers is mostlawful.
"Let our reciprocal vowsberemembered.
"You have many opportunitiesto cut him off.
"If your will want not,
"time and place will befruitfully offered.
"There is nothing done ifhe return the conqueror.
"Then am I the prisonerand his bed my jail,
"from the loathed warmthwhereof deliver me
"and supply the place foryour labor.
"Your wife so I would say
Affectionate servant,Goneril."
O indistinguished space ofwoman's will.
A plot upon her virtuoushusband's life
and the exchange mybrother.
The king is mad.
How stiff is my vilesense, that I stand up
and have ingeniousfeelings of my hugesorrows.
Better I were distract.
So should my thoughts besevered from my griefs
and woes by wrongimaginations
lose the knowledge ofthemselves.
Give me your hand.
Far off, methinks, I hearthe beaten drum.
Come, father; I'll bestowyou with a friend.
O thou good Kent,
how shall I live and workto match thy goodness?
My life will be too shortand every measure fail me.
To be acknowledged, madam,is o'erpaid.
All my reports go with themodest truth
nor more nor clipped, butso.
Be better suited.
These weeds are memoriesof those worser hours.
I prithee, put them off.
Pardon, dear madam.
Yet to be known shortensmy made intent.
My boon I make it that youknow me not
till time and I thinkmeet.
Then be it so, my goodlord.
How does the king?
Madam, sleeps still.
O you kind gods,
cure this great breach inhis abused nature.
The untuned and jarringsenses,
O, wind up of thischild-changed father.
So please Your Majestythat we may wake the king.
He hath slept long.
Be governed by yourknowledge,
and proceed in the sway ofyour own will.
Is he arrayed?
Aye, madam; in theheaviness of his sleep,
we put fresh garments onhim.
Be by, good madam, when wedo awake him.
I doubt not of histemperance.
Very well.
Please you, draw near.
O my dear father.
Restoration, hang thymedicine on my lips,
and let this kiss repairthose violent harms
that my two sisters havein thy reverence made.
Kind and dear princess.
Had you not been theirfather,
these white flakes didchallenge pity of them.
Was this a face to beopposed against thewarring winds?
Mine enemy's dog, thoughhe had bit me,
should have stood thatnight against my fire.
And wast thou fain, poorfather, to hovel thee
with swine and roguesforlorn in short and mustystraw?
Alack, alack.
'Tis wonder that thy lifeand wits at once
had not concluded all.
He wakes. Speak to him.
Madam, do you. 'Tisfittest.
How does my royal lord?
How fares Your Majesty?
You do me wrong to take meout o' the grave.
Thou art a soul in bliss,
but I am bound upon awheel of fire
which mine own tears doscald like molten lead.
Sir, do you know me?
You are a spirit, I know.
Where did you die?
Still, still, far wide.
He's scarce awake; let himalone awhile.
Where have I been?
Where am I?
Fair daylight?
I am mightily abused.
I would e'en die with pityto see another thus.
I know not what to say.
I will not swear these aremy hands.
Let's see.
I feel this pinprick.
Would I were assured of mycondition.
O, look upon me, sir,
and hold your hands inbenediction o'er me.
No, sir, you must notkneel.
Pray, do not mock me.
I am a very foolish, fondold man,
fourscore and upward, notan hour more nor less.
And, to deal plainly, Ifear I am not in myperfect mind.
Methinks I should know youand know this man.
Yet I am doubtful,
for I am mainly ignorantwhat place this is.
All my skill remembers notthese garments.
Nor I know not where I didlodge last night.
Do not laugh at me, for asI am a man,
I think this lady to be mychild Cordelia.
So I am. I am.
Be thy tears wet?
Yes, 'faith.
If you have poison for me,I will drink it.
I know you do not love me,for your sisters have,
as I remember, done mewrong.
You have some cause; theyhave not.
No cause.
Am I in France?
In your own kingdom, sir.
Do not abuse me.
Be comforted, good madam.
The great rage, you see,is killed in him,
and yet it is danger
to make him even o'er thetime he has lost.
Will it please yourhighness walk?
You must bear with me.
Pray you now, forget andforgive.
I am old and foolish.
Holds it true, sir,
that the Duke of Cornwallwas so slain?
Most certain, sir.
Who is the conductor ofhis people?
As 'tis said, the bastardson of Gloucester.
They say Edgar, hisbanished son,
is with the Earl of Kentin Germany.
Report is changeable.
'Tis time to look about.
The powers of the kingdomapproach apace.
The arbitrament is like tobe bloody.
Fare you well, sir.
My point and period willbe truly wrought,
or well or ill, as thisday's battle's fought.